Hi and welcome back
in this video we are going to be recording
our deletion of nodes.
Before we do that though, we need
a couple more helper methods.
We need to be able to find the parent node
of a given node and we also need to be
able to find the rightmost node of a branch.
So that we can then replace it.
So let's code def find parent,
which is going to take an int
and is going to return a node.
Let's code def find parent
and also let's code def find rightmost.
Now we're going to take a node
and it's going to return another node
so it's gonna take a node which is
the start of the branch.
So looking at this here,
if we give it seven, find rightmost
will give us eight, because that's the right most
node in this entire branch.
Find parent, if we give it seven,
will give us this node.
Okay?
So let's code these two methods.
What we're gonna do for find parent
is just the same thing we did for find,
I'm gonna open up here,
go through all the nodes,
but instead of checking whether the value we provided
is equal to the current node value,
we're gonna check the left and the right.
So I'm gonna see if any of the children have this value
and if they do we're gonna return the current node.
So if I find parent I'm gonna say current node
is self.head and then while current node is not empty
we're gonna say if current node left exists
and current node left.value is equal to the value
or, and I'm gonna put this divide there because in Python
that is useful for getting new lines,
splitting things into new lines.
Current node.right and current ndoe.right.value equal value.
If you don't include this by the way
it just gives you an error because it says,
what does this mean, this is not part of the if statement,
if you include this it realises that.
What do you want us to split this statement here
into two lines for readability.
So that's why you include that backslash there.
So if there is a left node and the value matches,
or there is a right node and the value matches,
that means we are the parent.
Because one of the two children have
the value we're looking for.
So we return current node, and then we're gonna just do
the same thing we did in the find.
If the value that we're looking for
is greater than the current node value,
we're gonna say current node is current node right.
And of course this has to be current node elif,
the value is less than current node.value.
We're gonna say current node equals current node.left.
Now you may notice that at no point here
are we returning the head.
We start off at the head but we check the two children,
and we return the head if the children have the value.
We never return the head if the head has the value,
or indeed there is no way that we will ever
be able to delete the head with this.
So what we're going to do is say if self.head
and self.head.value equal value return self.head.
The reason I'm doing this will become clearer as we
continue and indeed as we are going to
delete a node with two children,
because if we are looking to delete the head,
checking the children isn't going to give us the head.
It's only going to give us the head if the children
have the value we're looking for.
Not if the head has the value we're looking for.
It'll become clearer soon, I promise.
Let's then move on to find rightmost.
Find rightmost is a pretty straightforward method here.
All that we have to do is starting at this node here
go right until we reach the end.
So all we do, is we say current node equals node,
while current_node.right
current_node equals current_node.right.
And then at the end we will return current_node.
So again all we're doing is we are saying,
current_node will be it's right node until
there is nothing at the right.
And when there's nothing at the right,
we'll just return the current node,
because that is gonna be the right most node.
Once again, I'll show you the diagram here.
What we've got is, let's say we say
find right most of this branch,
what we'll do is we will start at seven,
check the right most node, the right node
and we say current_node is now eight
and then we say is there another right node?
No, so we'll return the eight.
And that is indeed the largest node in the branch.
It's never going to go left, because as soon
as you go left you're no longer the largest node.
So we'll just go right forever
until we reach the end.
Okay?
Let's then get into the delete.
We're gonna take a value.
That is gonna be an integer, and is going to delete.
What we have to take into consideration is that
we may have no children, one child, or two children.
So let's first get the to_delete which is gonna be
self.find(value) and to_delete_parent which is gonna be
self.find_parent(value)
so now we have the one we wanna delete
and the parent of that one.
And then we have a couple of statements.
If_to_detele.left and to_delete.right that means
we have two children elif to_delete.left or to_delete.right
we have one of the two that means we have one child,
and finally no children.
Okay?
So these are our options.
If we have two children we're gonna deal with
deleting the node here, if we have one child
we're going to deal with deleting the node here,
and if we have no children we're gonna deal
with deleting the node down there.
Let's start with no children, you know how
to do this already to some extent and once again
I'll show you the diagram just to make it clear.
Let's say we want to delete node three, okay.
This node has no children.
In order to delete node three, the first thing
we have to know is whether node three is the left
child or the right child.
Why?
Because what we're gonna do is we're gonna say five
has a child which is three on the left.
Let's make five left point to none instead of three.
That means we essentially delete this link there
and Python will delete the three for us.
So if to_delete equals to_delete_parent.left
we're gonna say to_delete_parent.left is none.
Otherwise if to_delete is equal to to_delete_parent.right
we're gonna say to_delete_parent.right is none.
And there is a final option, which is now
where the the other stuff we coded earlier becomes
a bit more obvious.
It could be the node we wanted to delete,
and it's parent left are not the same.
It could also be the node we wanna delete
and it's parent right are not the same.
When?
Well let's have a look.
Imagine you want to delete the root node.
The root node is not it's parents' left or right
because it doesn't have one.
Indeed in this case to_delete and to_delete_parent
will be the same.
Why?
Because to_delete is gonna find the root node,
to_delete_parent is actually also going to give us
the root node because we're looking for the head's value.
So these two are going to be the same,
these if statements are both going to be false,
and this is where we'll end up at.
The else where we want to delete the head
all we have to do is self.head is none.
Assuming of course the head has no children.
This is what this else is doing.
If the head has no children,
that means the head is the last element in the tree.
It means the head has no children it means this.
So all we have to do is set it to none and then
the six will get deleted by Python.
okay?
If we have a child it becomes a little bit different.
Once again we have to do the same thing.
If to_delete is equal to to_delete's parent left
now we wanna say tdp left to_delete_parent.left
is equal to, let's go back to our diagram.
Let's say we wanna delete five,
we have to say that the parent which is six,
the parent's left must be equal to the child of five.
The child of five could be at the left or it could be
at the right, we don't know.
So what to do?
To_delete_parent.left is to_delete.right
or to_delete.left.
So again what we've done here is use the or syntax
in Python to say that to_delete_parent.left has to be
to_delete_parent.right but if it's none
use to_delete.left instead.
So that's a pretty handy way of going about it.
Then again we do the same thing but with the right.
Finally there's one last option, which is when
to_delete_parent and to_delete are the same.
If they are the same that means that self.head
must become the right or the left nodes.
In that way we will essentially be replacing one of them.
What's happening here is of course,
let me see if I can hide that, move that there,
and show it to you like this.
Yes, that is a little bit better.
Assuming we have one child, which is
for example this branch here, in this case
if to_delete is the parent's left which it is
in this case, what we want to do is set
to_delete_parent which is six left node to be equal
to this left node.
Okay?
Sorry, by that I mean, if this node
is at the left of this one.
If this one is at the left of this one we wanna set
this left to be either the left or the right,
depending on which one is available.
Okay?
If we wanted to delete say twelve,
we'll check, is twelve the right child of nine?
This would be done down here.
Is twelve equal to to_delete_parent.right?
Is it the same one?
Is twelve equal to to_delete.parent.right?
Yes, so we set to_delete_parent's right node
to be equal to the left or the right of twelve.
In this case it'll be eleven.
Notice how we can do left or right,
because we know that twelve only has one child.
That's what this if statement here checks.
And finally if you only have one of these branches and you
want to delete the root or the head node, that means that
to_delete and to_delete_parent are the same
because they're both the head.
And if that's the case all we wanna do
is say the head is now five or whatever it was on the right.
So we'll essentially be deleting six.
Okay hopefully this makes a little bit of sense.
It's really tricky when you start off to really
wrap your head around this.
So what I encourage you is to draw these out.
Actually I have a lot of drawings of these
mine maps... they're no mine maps but of these
binary trees beside me as I was planning this section out
because it didn't want to get it wrong.
And it is confusing, it's confusing even after
you've been at it for many years, so don't feel
bad about having to draw this out on paper.
It's something that we all do,
so I definitely encourage you to do that.
The last thing that we've got left
is the leading two children.
We're going to do this in the very next video,
just because this one is getting a bit long,
and it's gonna be a little bit trickier.
There's a few if statements that have to go in here.
So let's look at this in the very next video.
I'll see you there.